the background here at A&M, that coming here from
Ithaca right away to teach, I had to give up my, what
I had begun on our Long Island as a soil surveyor,
which Dr. Lyon said I really needed. And Dr. W.T.
Carter, who was the soil, held the position of the
division of soil survey for the state of Texas and
produced the first fine soil map of Texas and the
discussion and description of the soil types and
soil series of Texas. He took me in hand and not only
took me but my graduate students and me into the
major soil divisions of Texas and supervise and
super and conducted our our investigation of the
Maine soil regions and how to make, which was then
very well-recognized in 19 and 26, the soil
profile, 27 and right on up through 1934 when we had
a soil...
We had the soil...
Science in the federal branch in 1935 changed to
soil conservation service.
Soil erosion service for one year and then changed
to soil service, soil conservation. And I took at
the cooperation and suggestion of Dean Kyle and
and
Garb and Merrill, Lewis P. Merrill, was able to
spend the summer of 1934 in the Soil Conservation
Service near Tyler in Smith County.
In the summer of 1934.
Depression was being felt pretty strongly at A&M.
And most teachers took a cut of around 30%. And
our first child, our second child was born that
year. And due to family background, I took my wife
to Temple to give birth to the child at Scott and
White Hospital in Grover, but her college station
twice a week to help Dr. J.O. Morgan on the
laboratory. Dr. Morgan was then beginning to feel
the result of his night and day work when he worked
on his PhD at Cornell. He got tooth trouble and he
died later in 33. And then a job was offered at
Prairie View, teaching soils there, which I was
very glad to have in that summer of 1930. When I came
back, Fred Hale, who was a
meat cutting man, an animal husbandry expert,
looked at my hand and said, well, Lucy, you haven't
turned black yet.
When you were on the faculty, say from 27 on, did you
live on campus, in campus housing? Yes. We, 26 to
27, we rented one of the new houses from Dr. Weasley
Clark's
College Station Development Association south
of the campus. In the fall of 27, Thomas F. Mayo,
librarian, encouraged my wife and me to sublet his
house on the campus next to the hospital. In the
fall of 28, the
faculty committee on housing awarded us rental of
a house behind what was then The Steel Stadium next
to Professor Ness.
Had some valuable association in those years. Was
the Steel Stadium located in the same place as the
current Kyle Field? Yes. When it was dismantled in
the summer of 29, then they moved our house down to a
place right looking upon the beginning of the
100-yard dash. What was in the 100-yard dash
straight away. What type of house were you in?
Frame house, which had previously been part of the
old hospital.
The other half was the one that had been used on the
campus by Dr. Mayo.
Did you continue to live on campus through all of
your teaching career, or at what point did you move
off? We lived on campus until the rule came up in
1941 that
nobody, be he dean or be he an instructor, should
continue to live on the campus in a campus house.
We built a house then. present location in a
five-acre tract, later a 26-acre tract, which we
developed. Was that 41 or 51? 41. But there were
still houses on the campus for a good long while,
actually. For certain groups, such as the
electrician and the librarian
the sewer, such as required night. They were
primarily staff instead of faculty. Yes, sir. Was
there a considerable amount of socializing among
the families who lived in those houses? Quite so.
But due to A&M, even then, was one of the most
pleasant places that I had ever been. In fact, when
I got out of the Army and came down and rented a room
in the YMCA and looked out of the back room onto
Military Walk and saw the students doing the
setting up exercises at 7 a.m., decided that this
was the place that I wanted to be in my future.
And speaking of housing, I'm reminded of another
question I meant to ask you earlier. While you were
working on your master's at Texas A&M in, what,
1919 and 1920 and 21. Where did you live at that
point? In
19...
In 19...
I'd gotten out of the Army until the fall of...
1919, I lived in the old Shirley Hotel, which were
two frame buildings and offered not only housing
but good food. And the Shirley Hotel then was torn
down later to make way for the Aggieland Inn. In the
fall of 1919, in September, I was able to get into
Milner Hall with W. William P. Derrick, who later
became animal husbandry chief at Nebraska
University, University of Nebraska. And I had to
go from there to the second year in graduate work
and lived in Gallegate Hall, where we found out
what it was, what was meant by the entomological
ability to make the dormitories entirely free. of
anything that might molest a sleeper.
Milner Hall was always a delightful dormitory to
me. Were there all graduate students living in
Milner Hall? No, it was mixed then. Mixed. What
about when you moved to Leggett? Was it also mixed?
Mostly undergraduates, but my roommate there was
a graduate student too, who later went to Brazil to
the Presbyterian Church to introduce agronomy,
agronomic work in Brazil. Where did you have your
meals? We were fortunate to be able to eat in Speza
Hall. But I take it since you were not military, you
did not have to march in with the... No sir, we ate in
what was called the civilian, they didn't call
them civilians, they called them another name. At
one point they called them casuals. Casuals, yes.
So you had a separate dining area within Sevesa for
the... Yes,
yes. Okay. I believe I picked up from a newspaper
clipping in our files that you served a number of
years on the College Station City Council. Yes, I
was on the initial organization where we met in the
chemistry building lecture room in, to the best of
my recollection, in October 19, I know the year
definitely, 1938. It was either spring or the fall
of 1938 and resolved that we didn't have but one
road to get to Bryan. And I had been pointed, had
been pointed to committee to see if we could get
what is now College Main Street graveled so we
could get to Bryan easier. And the county
And the judge said, where's the money coming from?
And I said, from the county sources, or perhaps
Brian can furnish a little to help get that trade
into Brian. And this, you can put this in or not as
you want. And said, we can't spend money on that. So
we met, we got together and said we needed another
grocery store. We had one Luke Patronell and
Charlie Northgate and organized a video college
station
and without pay for anybody, John Henry Binney was
the mayor and Wheeler Bargo was made the
county, the city attorney
and we gave Jack
Boyd, the honorary distinction of being the
deputy. And we each sparked up a little and got a
deposit in the bank, I think, of $70. You mentioned
that you only had one road. We had to go and follow
the railroad track on what is now Old College Road.
And that's the one you wanted to have graveled?
We had a piece of...
Yes, we wanted that road graveled. Because what is
now College of Maine didn't extend beyond the...
what is now the...
complex of apartment houses. Okay. About 200
yards. Uh-huh. That is the four-lane portion of
College Main that runs between Skag Albertson's
and the Collegeville apartments. Didn't exist.
That didn't exist. That came into existence under
Chancellor Gilchrist. And I remember that
distinctly because I was on advisory committee
and
the the ones the county wanted to build the road to
directly enter Abazel, what do you know, Abazel
Street. And Mr. Giltrist stated that that might
not fit too well into the campus plans that were
already made. And it was opened up then.
into the present location.
It almost coincides.
Did, you indicated that... I was also on the school
board for the Consolidated School in, I think in
the year 19 and
in 1939, D.B. Cofer and Mitchell. John Mitchell
decided that we needed to transfer to have a school
outside of the A&M campus, which was meeting then
in old Pfeiffer Hall and that wooden building
adjacent.
And he made the rounds from different people to try
to get enough to buy a little piece of land where we
could have a school. And at that time, among other
activities, I was one of the competitors for the
open handball competition we held, so-called
championship. And Mr. Colfer and Mr. Mitchell
walked all the way down to the old handball courts,
which were in that wooden building. and asked me if
I'd contribute to buying that old piece of ground.
And I think I gave him what was the end of, what we
thought was the end of the Depression, $200. And
Mr. Cashin then headed, that was treasurer, and
went over and bought that piece of land from the,
uh, um, Dowborough Valleys and the, uh, that's
where the current where the original school is now
what's um or it's still what the three-story where
the three-story brick building is that faces
jersey street yes sir it's not it's not
three-story though is it two two well it does well
to be a good one and a half uh-huh Well, it was the
middle school a couple years ago. Now the middle
school's moved across the street where the high
school used to be by the football stadium there.
Well, that's where our first teaching place was.
Now, where? You mean where the... The so-called
hunk of land going out Bissell Street, isn't it,
into Jersey? You come right into what was the first
piece of land for the school. Mm-hmm. And various
citizens were allowed to volunteer to put in the
pavement of the sidewalks, which Dr. A. A. Dunlap
and I did a lot of work in, and the getting of a Yopon
and other shrubs. There was a whole lot of
community feeling in those days. But at that point
I would say probably everybody whose children
went to that school was either a faculty or staff
member at Texas A&M? I believe it was, yes. There
were many of the, that's right, faculty or staff
members, yes. That's a good way to put it. There
were some folks from the dairy, there were certain
dairy families, dairy production, milk
production families, their children went to
Consolidated.
You mentioned something about either getting the
road paved to Bryan or else having to have another
grocery store. Did you get that other grocery
store? We wound up having a grocery store on... We
didn't wind up. We had already inveigled the
faculty, I mean the management,
the Department of Physical Plants, what's now
Physical Plants. I put in a store right next to
Milner Hall and they did a big business and it was
very convenient and helpful. Then the other
grocery store that we were talking about was at
South Gate and resulted from that incorporation
as a incorporated municipality.
The store that was on the campus, how long was that
in existence?
About 10 years, if I can remember correctly. Did
that start in 38 or 39? It was in the 30s. In the 30s
that it started. So it carried what, a general line
of groceries it would be? Yes, and bought from
wholesale from what was then the Howell Wholesale
Grocery. But it was, I would think that would have
been kind of a unique situation where the
university or the college would run its own. Well,
the college really didn't have only an indirect
control over it in the least, but it put in for the
help of the faculty. And I was one of, with Pete
Butler and Burgess and
I missed the printer. We needed also a place where
men could cash checks at odd hours, which were then
odd hours, and we put in, for that purpose,
organized a little state bank in 1946. Where was it
located? It was located in a wooden shack behind
where Homer Adams held his insurance store. What
became of that bank? It is now the University
National Bank. It became the University
National.
We had on the campus with Dr. I.P. Trotter as
president, and I think it resulted in an assistant
to the clerk, and we had the faculty loan and
discount organizations on the campus. And when we
got together and organized that bank, we allowed
the bank to buy up that little
faculty loan association.
Get a mental block now and then. Uh-huh.
I can remember that Dr. I.P. Trotter and I, as his
assistant, had to close it out, and
Mrs. Bower was also one of the last to give up. That
was for your loan associate, faculty loan
association. But you sold that out to the
University National Bank. Yes. Was that always
its name or did it have a... It started out as the
College Station State Bank, 1946. And
we had a, which you may not want, we had a up and down
kaleidoscopic career for the first five years,
which you might have heard of. No, I hadn't heard
it. Well, after about three years,
we had an executive vice president, which I won't
name, who decided to make a loan of $40,000
to a man who was didn't have too good a record to buy
pipe. And to close the Second World War, about
1948-9, pipe was to be bought from a man in Dallas
who didn't really possess the pipe. And the money,
instead of being put in, and I'll put this in
writing, instead of being handled in telegraph,
was handled by telephone by the executive
vice president. And when it got to the big bank in
Dallas, this man owed them more money than the
amount a pipe cost, and their money was gone to
seed. Another case of a big dog eating a little dog.
We went to suit and got back half of it. and
everybody out of $38 a share, I mean out of $26 a
share, counting the stock and the reserve,
everybody put up $12 gladly and surprised all the
state banking department in Austin by being we all
our directors met over there in Austin on a
Saturday including Dr. Pete Butler and Herschel
Burgess and myself and
had the money raised by Monday and now I have over 17
million below the line. I take it you have
continued your connection with the University
National Bank then? Yes, my interest in it
continues.
I guess you'd call it a director. You're still on
the board of directors of the bank? At the age of 80.
But you were one of the founders of it? Yes, the
first president of it. Because it couldn't get
anybody else to take it. Back to a little bit to your
service on the city council in the city of College
Station. I believe that was for, I believe I picked
up seven years, which would have begun in 1938 or
39. those must have been some pretty important
years since that was when the city was actually
incorporated or was created. You, I imagine, had
to do a lot of planning, did you not? We did indeed
and we had to be very careful of promises and when
big arguments took place between dwellers
on one of the best streets, such as Lee Street, and
the dwellers on,
what's the name of the general? First big general.
Pershing? Pershing Street, on whether the alley
should preserve its trees or should have trees cut
so as to permit the entrance and exit of the garbage
pickup truck the council had some very grave
problems to handle. Sometimes members of the
council would go out and and help open up certain
areas and some of the busiest times was when the
council almost overlapped with the school board
and you had to try to get room for gravel and for
pavement, for sidewalks at least, and for housing
for some of the teachers in the school.
Dr. Clark deserves credit for having started the
first housing plan in College Station. And this is
F.B. Clark? Yep, F.B. Clark. And it was very
difficult in 1926 for a professor of poultry
husbandry to get a loan locally to build a house,
and he had to go to Houston Building and Loan to get
his loan.
But later that opened up very Well, indeed,
because the teaching staff during the Depression
had a type of person that paid every month on the
doc. But it was hard money. And you got a faculty
member that made $2,000. He thought he was riding
high. Yeah, I can imagine, because there were a lot
of people that weren't making anything. Yes. We
weren't making anything. And one of the
daughters, the daughters of one of our eminent men
on the campus, one of the deans, married one of the
most promising of our graduates here, who opened
up a series of service stations in Memphis, which
looked like one of the most productive jobs in the
world. wound up having to service his own station,
and she said that a person that had a job on the A&M
faculty that gave him at least $1,800 really
didn't know how lucky he was. She was the daughter
of a dean.
Those depression years produced a type of man that
we wonder now what kind of individuals we have that
can get on welfare and won't need to work. You can
eliminate that, maybe. Well, I think you're not at
all alone in making that comment. It's a fairly
widely held belief and I think with some
justification.
doubt, though, that you would seriously advocate
that we come back to the Depression era? We give
welfare in the amount that is given and Social
Security.
We wouldn't come back to a place like we had in 1932.
And we have friends who have read White, not Stuart
Edward White, but the other White, who was the
originator of Cornell University. Ezra Cornell
got Dr. White to map out the foundation of Cornell
in 1868, and he wrote a